Climate impacts from water-rich large-magnitude volcanic eruptionsLeeds PhD supervisors: Dr. Graham Mann, Prof. Amanda Maycock and Dr. Alex RapUK Met Office supervisors: Dr. Ben Johnson (volcanic aerosol) and Dr. James Manners (water vapour) Other advisors: Prof. Anna Hogg (Leeds, Antarctic sea-ice impacts), Dr. Chris Smith (Brussels, future climate projections),1. Introduction The January 2022 Hunga eruption was the most explosive volcanic event in the satellite era (Wright et al., 2022) and is providing a new paradigm for volcanic impacts on climate. The shallow underwater setting of the Hunga eruption caused its radiative forcing to have a substantial component also from emitted water vapour (Sellitto et al., 2022), with stratospheric enhancement projected to remain in the stratosphere for 5-10 years (Millan et al., 2022). The high altitude emission of the stratospheric water vapour (above 20km) is now known to have restricted to only a weak surface warming effect, much less than the solar dimming effect from the volcanic aerosol (Schoeberl et al., 2023; 2024). However, a follow-on study (Wang and Huang, 2024) has demonstrated how a future water-rich eruption emitting closer to the tropopause would cause a substantial volcanic H2O surface warming effect.Another model study (Jucker et al., 2024) finds the long-lived Hunga stratospheric water vapour causes later surface-warming effect and Wu et al. (2025) show how Hunga released 18.8Tg of SO2, the underwater setting removing 95% of the emitted sulphur, only 5% within the eruption plume reaching the stratosphere. Hunga's elevated stratospheric optical depth was the largest since 1991 Pinatubo, and the reduction to background levels represents a natural warming trend alongside the concurrent 2023 shift into El Nino. 2. The unusual volcanic forcing from the January 2022 Hunga eruption The years after historical major volcanic eruptions such as 1991 Pinatubo and 1883 Krakatau have a substantial natural surface cooling, a 2- or 3-year solar dimming caused by long-lived volcanic sulphate aerosol in the stratosphere. In the years after such major eruptions, decadal forcing trends become dominated by natural radiative forcings, with a sudden-onset into strong surface cooling. Time-varying global volcanic aerosol datasets for historical major eruptions are a key input dataset into for example IPCC 1850-present climate model integrations.The 2022 Hunga forcing is unusual compared to Pinatubo, a much smaller increase in stratospheric water vapour occurring in the years after the June 1991 eruption. However, other historical major eruptions have entrained external water into the volcanic plume (e.g. Rowell et al., 2022) and Joshi and Jones (2009) found Krakatau’s aerosol cooling was partially offset by a substantial surface warming from emitted water vapour, with similarities to Hunga’s forcing. This PhD project will involve model experiments with the UK Earth System Model, to explore the climate influence from co-emitted water vapour in Krakatau-magnitude major eruption case studies. The PhD is approved as a CASE project, for this Oct 2026 YES-DTN round, the research to be in co-operation with Met Office scientists, within the Leeds-Met Office academic partnership. 3. PhD aligns with new Hunga APARC activity & volcano-climate model experiments for CMIP7 The long-lived enhancement to stratospheric water vapour (Millan et al., 2022; Khaykin et al., 2022) has motivated a 2025 Hunga impacts report, aligned to the next WMO/UNEP Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion (see https://www.aparc-climate.org/activities/hunga-tonga/ ). The first study to assess the longevity of the Hunga stratospheric water vapour (Jucker et al., 2024) identifies the surface warming effect would be strongest during 2025-2026, after the aerosol cooling effect has receded. Although the climate impacts are only weak, the event has highlighted the potential for stratospheric water vapour forcing within volcanic impacts on climate. The unusual water vapour volcanic forcing has also motivated new multi-model experiments within the next phase of the VolMIP volcano-climate sub-group of CMIP7 (Zanchettin et al., 2016; 2022). The World Climate Programme has a co-ordinating “Explaining and Predicting Earth System Change” lighthouse activity (Findell et al., 2023), the Leeds supervisors playing a leading role also in the APARC international activity, and the 2025 Hunga impacts report, to be released in December 2025, during AGU conference week. 4. The PhD projectThis PhD project will involve simulations with the UK Earth System Model (Sellar et al., 2019a, 2019b), with new stratospheric water vapour volcanic forcing datasets to represent impacts from Hunga-like water-rich major eruptions.The Leeds team developed the interactive volcanic aerosol configuration of the UK composition-climate model UM-UKCA (Dhomse et al., 2020; Marshall et al., 2019; Dhomse et al., 2014) and the UKESM model experiments in the PhD will be designed to understand the progression of a scaled-up Hunga case study in preparedness for future major water-rich eruption.The UKESM experiments will stem from satellite measurements of the Hunga aerosol and water vapour increase, and explore how volcano-climate impacts contrast with those from sulphur-dominated large-magnitude explosive eruptions such as 1991 Pinatubo. The model experiments to understand these new volcano-climate impacts gives the studentship potential for ground-breaking paper presenting Hunga-like major eruption impacts within near-term decadal climate projections. The project will be supervised by Dr Graham Mann, Prof. Amanda Maycock and Dr Alex Rap, with advice also from Prof. Anna Hogg (Antarctic sea-ice impacts) and Dr. Chris Smith (IPCC future climate projections). With the project a guaranteed CASE studentship, the PhD will include a placement at the UK Met Office, to work alongside Dr. Johnson and Dr. Manners and others in the UKESM team based in Exeter.
